---
layout: page
#
# Content
#
title: "CRAN Release of R/exams 2.3-1"
teaser: "New minor release of the R/exams package to CRAN, containing a wide range of smaller improvements and bug fixes. Notable new features include a dedicated OpenOLAT interface, and a convenience function facilitating the use of TikZ-based graphics."
categories:
  - general
tags:
  - R
  - exams
  - internationalization
  - TikZ
  - LaTeX
  - Markdown
author: zeileis

#
# Style
#
image:
  # shown on top of blog post
  title: cran231.title.png
  # preview in list of posts
  thumb: cran231.300.png
  # shown on landing page
  # homepage:
  # shown under image on top of blog post
  caption: "R/exams on CRAN screenshot (CC-BY)."
---

Version 2.3-1 of the one-for-all exams generator [R/exams](http://www.R-exams.org/) has been published on the Comprehensive R Archive Network at <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=exams>. In the next days this will propagate to other CRAN mirrors along with Windows binary packages. The development version of the package is now version 2.3-2 on <http://R-Forge.R-project.org/forum/?group_id=1337>.


## New features

* Added new interface `exams2openolat()` for the open-source [OpenOLAT](https://www.openolat.com/) learning management system. This is only a convenience wrapper to `exams2qti12()` or `exams2qti21()` with some dedicated tweaks for optimizing MathJax output for OpenOLAT.
* New function `include_tikz()` that facilitates compiling standalone TikZ figures into a range of output formats, especially PNG and SVG (for HTML-based output). This is useful when including TikZ in R/Markdown exercises or when converting R/LaTeX exercises to HTML. Two examples have been added to the package that illustrate the capabilities of `include_tikz()`: [automaton]({{ site.url }}/templates/automaton/), [logic]({{ site.url }}/templates/logic/). A dedicated blog post is also planned.


## Written exams (NOPS)

* Following the blog post on [Written R/exams around the World]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/nops_language/) several users have been kind enough to add language support for: Croatian ([hr.dcf]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/2018-01-08-nops_language/hr.dcf), contributed by [Krunoslav Juraić](http://www.irb.hr/eng/People/Krunoslav-Juraic)), Danish ([da.dcf]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/2018-01-08-nops_language/da.dcf), contributed by [Tue Vissing Jensen](http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6594-5094) and [Jakob Messner](http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1027-3673)),Slovak ([sk.dcf]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/2018-01-08-nops_language/sk.dcf), contributed by Peter Fabsic), Swiss German ([gsw.dcf]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/2018-01-08-nops_language/gsw.dcf), contributed by [Reto Stauffer](http://retostauffer.org)), Turkish ([tr.dcf]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/2018-01-08-nops_language/tr.dcf), contributed by [Emrah Er](http://eremrah.com/)). Furthermore, Portuguese has been distinguished into [pt-PT.dcf]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/2018-01-08-nops_language/pt-PT.dcf) (Portuguese Portuguese) vs. [pt-BR.dcf]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/2018-01-08-nops_language/pt-BR.dcf) (Brazilian Portuguese) with [pt.dcf]({{ site.url }}/assets/posts/2018-01-08-nops_language/pt.dcf) defaulting to the former (contributed by [Thomas Dellinger](http://www3.uma.pt/thd/)).
* After setting a random seed `exams2nops()` and `exams2pdf()` now yield the same random versions of the exercises. Previously, this was not the case because `exams2nops()` internally generates a single random trial exam first for a couple of sanity checks. Now, the `.GlobalEnv$.Random.seed` is restored after generating the trial exam.
* Fixed the support for `nsamp` argument in `exams2nops()`. Furthermore, current limitations of `exams2nops()` are pointed out more clearly in error messages and edge cases caught.
* Allow varying points within a certain exercise in `nops_eval()`.


## HTML output and Base64-encoded supplements

* In `exams2html()` and other interfaces based on `make_exercise_transform_html()` the option `base64 = TRUE` now uses Base64 encoding for all file extensions (known to the package) whereas `base64 = NULL` only encodes image files (previous default behavior).
* Bug fixes and improvements in HTML transformers:
  - Only `="file.ext"` (with `="`) for supplementary files embedded into HTML is replaced now by the corresponding Base64-encoded version.
  - `href="file.ext"` is replaced by `href="file.ext" download="file.ext"` prior to Base 64 replacement to assure that the file name is preserved for the browser/downloader.
  - `alt="file.ext"` and `download="file.ext"` are preserved without the Base64-encoded version of `file.ext`.
* Include further file URIs for Base64 supplements, in particular .sav for SPSS data files.
* In `exams2blackboard(..., base64 = FALSE, ...)` the `base64 = FALSE` was erroneously ignored. No matter how base64 was specified essentially `base64 = TRUE` was used, it is honored again now.


## Extensions

* `\exshuffle{<num>}` can now also be used for schoice exercises with more than one `TRUE` answer. In a first step only one of the `TRUE` answers is selected and then `<num>-1` items from the `FALSE` answers.
* Function `include_supplement(..., dir = "foo")` - without full path to `"foo"` - now also works if `"foo"` is not a local sub-directory but a sub-directory to the exercise directory `edir` (if specified).
* Enable passing of `envir` argument from `exams2html()` to `xweave()` in case of R/Markdown (.Rmd) exercises.
* When using `exams2html(..., mathjax = TRUE)` for testing purposes, mathjax.rstudio.com is used now rather than cdn.mathjax.org which is currently redirecting and will eventually be shut down completely.
* Added support for `\tightlist` (as produced by pandoc) in all current LaTeX templates as well as `exams2nops()`.


## Bug fixes

* Fixed a bug in `stresstest_exercise()` where the "rank" (previously called "order") of the correct solution was computed incorrectly. Additional enhancements in plots and labels.
* Fixed a bug for `tex2image(..., tikz = TRUE)` where erroneously `\usetikzlibrary{TRUE}` was included. Also `tex2image(..., Sweave = TRUE)` (the default) did not run properly on Windows, fixed now.
* Better warnings if `\exshuffle{<num>}` could not be honored due to a lack of sufficiently many (suitable) answer alternatives.
* Bug fix in CSV export of `exams2arsnova()`. Recent ARSnova versions use "mc" (rather than "MC") and "abcd" (rather than "SC") to code multiple-choice and single-choice questions, respectively.

