---
layout: page
#
# Content
#
title: "CRAN Release of R/exams 2.3-2"
teaser: "New minor release of the R/exams package to CRAN, containing a range of smaller improvements and bug fixes. Notably scanning of written NOPS exams is enhanced and made more reliable and a new exercise template demonstrates how to use advanced processing of numeric answers in Moodle."

categories:
  - general
tags:
  - R
  - exams
  - scan
  - Moodle
  - confidence
  - internationalization
  - LaTeX
author: zeileis

#
# Style
#
image:
  # shown on top of blog post
  title: cran232.title.png
  # preview in list of posts
  thumb: cran232.300.png
  # shown on landing page
  # homepage:
  # shown under image on top of blog post
  caption: "R/exams on CRAN screenshot (CC-BY)."
---


Version 2.3-2 of the one-for-all exams generator [R/exams](https://www.R-exams.org/) has been published on the Comprehensive R Archive Network at <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=exams>. In the next days this will propagate to other CRAN mirrors along with Windows and OS X binary packages. The development version of the package is now version 2.3-3 on R-Forge at <http://R-Forge.R-project.org/forum/?group_id=1337>.


## Written exams (NOPS)

* Support for further languages is available in `exams2nops()` and `nops_eval()`: Russian (`ru`, contributed by [Boris Demeshev](https://www.hse.ru/en/staff/bbd/)) and Serbian (`sr`, contributed by [Tatjana Kecojevic](https://tanjakec.github.io/)). Furthermore, Croatian (`hr`) was streamlined along with Serbian by Tatjana Kecojevic.
* In `exams2nops()` the `header` argument can also be specified simply as `header = "\\mycommand{value}"` rather than `header = list(mycommand = "value")`. The former is more flexible, e.g., for passing additional options or more complex commands. Internally, the former is turned into an unnamed list which is then processed correspondingly by `exams2pdf()`.
* Scanning of written NOPS exams is enhanced and registration IDs are processed more reliably: First, `nops_scan()` gained a new argument `trim = 0.3` that controls how much of the check boxes is trimmed in order to shave the borders prior to determining the average gray level. In versions up to 2.3-1 this implicitly had a value of `0.25` hard-coded. Now the default increased to `0.3` in order to shave box borders more reliably, e.g., in more pixelated scans. Second, `nops_scan()` tries to process registration numbers more reliably. In case one of the registration columns contains more than one potential mark, the heuristics of determining the intended mark have been improved.
* `nops_eval()` gained a new argument `labels = NULL` that can be used to give labels for the marks that differ from the default `(length(mark) + 1):1`.


## New exercise templates

* The new exercise [confint3]({{ site.url }}/templates/confint3/) (Rmd/Rnw) illustrates how to use the `verbatim` type for advanced processing in Moodle when asking for the computation of a 2-sided confidence interval. Rather than using a single correct value for each numeric result (along with a corresponding tolerance interval) as in `num` exercises (see [confint2]({{ site.url }}/templates/confint2/)), the exercise also provides a second partially correct value for each result. More precisely, the exercise yields 100% of the points for the correct solution based on t quantiles but still 50% for the solution based on normal quantiles. This is possible by setting the type to `verbatim` and specifying the solution via the necessary Moodle XML markup directly, e.g., `:NUMERICAL:=<value1>:<tolerance1>~%50%<value2>:<tolerance2>#<comment>`. The exercise is a contribution by [Ulrike Groemping](http://prof.beuth-hochschule.de/groemping/).


## Extensions

* Rather than fully importing the basic dependencies `stats`, `graphics`, `grDevices`, `tools`, and `utils`, only the required functions from those packages are imported selectively. The main motivation for this was that otherwise the code evaluated in R/exams exercises might also use the same NAMESPACE semantics as the `exams` package - instead of employing the setup in the user's environment. The issue was raised in this [StackOverflow thread](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/53414611/r-exams-package-weird-behaviour-with-dplyr) by [Florian Oswald](https://floswald.github.io/).
* In `include_supplement()` an argument `target = NULL` is added to optionally include the supplement with a different file name than the original file name.
* In all LaTeX templates that use Helvetica (phv) as the font for the main text, this is also used now in math mode by `\usepackage[helvet]{sfmath}` (rather than `\usepackage{sfmath}`, as employed previously). In particular, this affects `exams2nops()` and `tex2image()` output.

## Bug fixes

* In previous versions the `pandoc`-based HTML `converter` erroneously produced unbalanced `<p>` tags in certain situations.
* The QTI 2.1 XML output from `exams2qti21()` is somewhat cleaner, fixing some computations for correct/incorrect answers in `schoice`/`mchoice` exercises.
