---
layout: page
#
# Content
#
title: "New R/exams Version: TinyTeX, Fixing Parameters and Random Seeds, and More"
teaser: "New minor releases of the R/exams package to CRAN with many enhancements including TinyTeX support and extended control over the random variation in dynamic exercises through fixed parameters or custom random seeds."

categories:
  - general
tags:
  - R
  - exams
  - LaTeX
author: zeileis

#
# Style
#
image:
  # shown on top of blog post
  title: cran236.title.png
  # preview in list of posts
  thumb: cran236.300.png
  # shown on landing page
  # homepage:
  # shown under image on top of blog post
  caption: "R/exams on CRAN screenshot (CC-BY)."
---

New versions of the [R/exams](https://www.R-exams.org/) package (2.3-5 and 2.3-6) have been released on the Comprehensive R Archive Network at <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=exams>. The second update was necessitated by more thorough checks for `pandoc` availability on Solaris and OS X. In the next days binary Windows and OS X packages should also become available. The development version of the package is now version 2.4-0 on R-Forge at <http://R-Forge.R-project.org/R/?group_id=1337>.

## TinyTeX support

R/exams users that want to produce PDF output, e.g., via `exams2pdf()` or `exams2nops()`, need to install LaTeX for rendering the exercises. Especially for users that do not write LaTeX documents themselves (but only Markdown instead) it is now much easier to install a lightweight LaTeX distribution thanks to the wonderful [TinyTeX](https://yihui.org/tinytex/) package by Yihui Xie. All that needs to be done is:
 
```{r}
install.packages("tinytex")
tinytex::install_tinytex()
```

The latter installs the TinyTeX distribution and the former makes the R interface available. After that it is recommended to run `exams2nops()` once:

```{r}
exams2nops(c("swisscapital.Rmd", "deriv2.Rmd"))
```

This takes a while because some additional LaTeX packages will be downloaded and installed automatically. Running the same command a second time will be much faster because then all required LaTeX packages will already be available.

If the `tinytex` R package is installed, the default is to compile PDF exams with `tinytex::latexmk()`; otherwise `tools::texi2dvi()` is used (which does not offer automatic LaTeX package installation). If the latter should be used even when `requireNamespace("tinytex")` is true, then `options(exams_tex = "tools")` can be set (instead of `exams_tex = "tinytex"`)


## Fixing parameters and seeds

One frequent feature request for R/exams was to reduce the amount of random variation in exams even if the underlying exercise templates offer more flexibility. Application cases are where teachers want to control each randomly selected exercise in a quiz or exam manually. To address this, two mechanisms are provided now:

1. Some of the parameters that would usually be sampled randomly can be temporarily fixed (on the fly) by using the new function `expar()`.
2. Several `exams2xyz()` interfaces gained a `seed` argument with which dedicated random seeds can be selected per exercise.

### Fixing parameters

The first feature is of interest, for example, if computing the solution becomes harder when a certain parameter increases or takes a particular value. The new function `expar()` allows to fix such parameters on the fly if they are defined in the first code chunk of the exercise. For example

```{r}
expar("deriv.Rmd", a = 1, c = 0)
```

generates a temporary file where the parameters `a` and `c` of the [deriv]({{ site.url }}/templates/deriv/) exercise are fixed to the values `1` and `0`, respectively. The result can then be processed by all `exams2xyz()` interfaces "as usual", e.g.:

```{r}
exams2html(c(
  expar("deriv.Rmd", a = 1, c = 0),
  "deriv.Rmd"
))
```

A potential caveat is that `expar()` either needs the exercise file to be available locally in the current working directoy or with the full path. It does not work with the `edir` argument of subsequent `exams2xyz()` calls.

### Fixing seeds

Some `exams2xyz()` interfaces now support setting `seed`s for each individual exercise in an exam to enable custom exercise selection (e.g., when only putting together a single exam). Currently, this is only supported in `xexams()`, `exams2pdf()`, `exams2html()`, `exams2nops()`, and `exams2blackboard()`. Other interfaces will follow, though.

Thus, using this feature, teachers can try a few random seeds for a given exercise until they get a variant they like. Then they do the same with the next exercise etc. At the end all exercises and all seeds are collected and passed on in this form: `exams2xyz(c(exercise1, exercise2, ...), seed = c(seed1, seed2, ...))`.

Moreover, in the `exams2xyz()` interfaces that support setting seeds, the `file` argument can now also be a matrix (rather than a vector or list). This enables customization of the exact selection of exercises in each exam. In the example below we use exactly the same random replication of the [deriv]({{ site.url }}/templates/deriv/) and [tstat]({{ site.url }}/templates/tstat/) exercises, respectively, but permute their order. The final exercise is [ttest]({{ site.url }}/templates/ttest/) in both cases but with different seeds.

```{r}
f <- rbind(
  c("deriv.Rmd", "tstat.Rmd", "ttest.Rmd"),
  c("tstat.Rmd", "deriv.Rmd", "ttest.Rmd")
)
s <- rbind(
  c(123, 321, 111),
  c(321, 123, 222)
)
exams2html(f, seed = s)
browseURL(Sys.glob("plain*.html")[1])
browseURL(Sys.glob("plain*.html")[2])
```


## Written exams (NOPS)

The tools for written [NOPS exams]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/exams2nops) that can be automatically scanned and evaluated have been enhanced.

* Several users were kind enough to provide new [language support]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/nops_language/): Korean (`ko`, 정세원), Japanese (`ja`, Kohei Watanabe), Norwegian (Bokmål, `no`, Tormod Bøe), Slovenian (`sl`, Matjaž Jeran), Vietnamese (`vi`, Trần Thị Hoàng Hà).
* Improvements in `nops_eval()`: Show exam ID in HTML report and round points to four digits. The `language=` file paths do not have to be absolute anymore. For `interactive` checking/fixing of registration IDs the width of scanned subimage is now adapted according to the `reglength`.
* The actual writing of `nops_eval()` results has been modularized (with contributions from Kenji Sato). Different `nops_eval_write_<flavor>` functions can be plugged in. At the moment there is only the default writer (optimized for OpenOLAT) but further flavors are planned (including a standalone workflow and one for Moodle).
* Function `nops_language()` is now exported as part of the user interface (only internal previously). Based on a language specification in a DCF file this sets up a list with language texts (possibly converted to HTML).


## Improvements and bug fixes

* New exercise [capitals]({{ site.url }}/templates/capitals/) that illustrates how a certain number of true/false items can be chosen randomly from a longer list. The exercise can also be switched from `mchoice` to `schoice` without any further necessary modifications. Finally, the exercise illustrates that UTF-8 encoding is needed for the Rmd version while in the Rnw version the few special characters can be coded in ASCII using LaTeX commands.
* All LaTeX templates that use `\fontfamily{phv}` now also gained a `\usepackage{helvet}` to ensure that the corresponding LaTeX packages are installed. When using `tinytex` (see above) the corresponding LaTeX packages will be installed if not yet available upon first usage.
* In R/Markdown exercises the question/solution answerlist can now use not only `*` but also `-` as the symbol for bullet points (suggested by Ben Kasel).
* Fixed a bug in `exams2pdf()` where the case of multiple duplicated supplement names was not handled correctly (reported by TwelveFifths on StackOverflow).
* Improved `xexams()` so that full file paths to exercise files also work on Windows.
* `read_metainfo()` now assures a non-`NULL` `exname`. The default is to use "R/exams exercise".
* Fixed a bug in `extract_items()` which incorrectly dropped the last element in an answerlist if it was completely empty (even without a trailing space). This was a problem for cloze exercises with ##ANSWER## patterns, leading to a questionlist that was too short (reported by Julia Guggenberger).
* Various fixes and improvements in `exams2qti21()` (and thus inherited by `exams2openolat()`): Support of cloze and essay type exercises has been much improved, fixing bugs in the XML and meta-information handling. String exercises work again. The internally-generated XML labels are more robust now avoiding spaces and leading integers.
* The package depends on R >= 3.4.0 now, which enables plugging a custom svg device into `Sweave()`. In previous versions of the package a workaround was included that works for R < 3.4.0 (but required writing into the global environment which is avoided now).
