---
layout: page
#
# Content
#
title: "New R/exams Version: Improved E-Learning Tools During a Pandemic"
teaser: "Substantial new release of the R/exams package to CRAN with many new features and enhancements, especially for interfacing e-learning tools and learning management systems during the pandemic."

categories:
  - general
tags:
  - R
  - exams
  - LaTeX
author: zeileis

#
# Style
#
image:
  # shown on top of blog post
  title: cran240.title.png
  # preview in list of posts
  thumb: cran240.300.png
  # shown on landing page
  # homepage:
  # shown under image on top of blog post
  caption: "R/exams on CRAN screenshot (CC-BY)."
---

## Overview

The new version 2.4-0 of the [R/exams](https://www.R-exams.org/) package has been released on the Comprehensive R Archive Network at <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=exams>. This is the first CRAN release after 2.5 years of very active development. Due to the challenges from distance learning during the pandemic a lot of new features were added and enhancements made, especially for the support of various e-learning tools and learning management systems.

Many of changes were prompted by the authors' own needs (especially in the support of OpenOlat) but also by the many questions on StackOverflow, posts in the R-Forge forum, or tweets and e-mails from users all around the world. In the following the most important features from the update are highlighted. For the full list of changes including technical details and smaller bug fixes, see the [NEWS](https://CRAN.R-project.org/web/packages/exams/news/news.html) of the package release. More blog posts are planned for introducing some of the new features in more detail, e.g., cloze exercises and evaluation strategies.


## Facilitated support of UTF-8 and R/Markdown exercises

Initially, the package relied on Rnw (R/LaTeX) exercises only and optionally supported different encodings for non-ASCII characters, e.g., UTF-8 or latin1 (ISO-8859-1) etc. However, it was cumbersome to correctly set the encoding of input exercises _and_ output file formats.

Given that the majority of users by now seem to rely on Rmd (R/Markdown) exercises and that most output file formats involve using the `pandoc` document converter (which requires to use UTF-8) for some aspects, the entire `exams` package and all its function now exclusively use UTF-8 as well. All templates etc. have been modified to support UTF-8 out-of-the-box. This greatly facilitates working with UTF-8 as there is no need anymore to set any `encoding` argument anywhere.

Support for all other encodings like ISO-8859-* (latin1, latin9, etc.), which had previously been available for Rnw exercises in certain `exams2xyz()` interfaces, has been disabled. This is a slight reduction of functionality but will be a great benefit for most users of the package.

Finally, to facilitate working with Rmd exercises and embedded graphics or data files, the packages `base64enc`, `knitr`, and `rmarkdown` are now imported in the package (and not just suggested).


## Open-ended text questions with text editor or file upload

The processing of `string` exercises for learning management systems like Moodle, OpenOlat, or other QTI-based systems has been extended. By default, `string` exercises are intended for closed-format short-text answers that have to be matched exactly by the participants (e.g., asking for the name of an R function or exact value of an output string etc.). Additionally, open-ended text answers can now be enabled by setting the `exstringtype` meta-information to `essay` and/or `file`. The former requests a text editor for entering an answer while the latter requests a file upload dialogue. The [essayreg]({{ site.url }}/templates/essayreg/) exercise has been modified to leverage this new meta-information. Such exercises then have to be evaluated by the instructors/examiners, i.e., there is no automatic evaluation by the learning management system.

Similarly, the `exclozetype` meta-information now also accepts `essay` or `file` instead of `string` for elements of a `cloze` exercise. Currently, the combination of these types with `num` or `schoice` elements etc. is only possible for QTI-based systems (i.e., OpenOlat in particular) but not for Moodle (whose cloze format does not support open-ended text answers). For illustration, see the new `"essayreg2"` and `"lm3"` exercise templates.


## Enhancements for OpenOlat

Several enhancements and extensions have been made in `exams2openolat()` (or the underlying `exams2qti21()` function, respectively). The most important new features are:

- Improved processing of the `cutvalue` (for passing a test/exam/quiz). By default, this is `cutvalue = NULL` (or equivalently `cutvalue = NA`) which means that no pass/fail status is computed at all, i.e., only the sum of the points is reported. This is particularly useful if individual online tests during a semester contribute to an overall grade but cannot be passed/failed individually.
- New argument `navigation = "nonlinear"`. This can be switched to `"linear"` enforcing that questions in the test must be answered sequentially while the default `"nonlinear"` means that participants can switch back and forth between questions.
- New argument `selection = "pool"` that controls how exercises and sections are sampled. By default, the function creates one section for each exercise from which one replication will be selected in the exam. If `selection = "exam"` each section contains all questions and one section will be selected for the exam. The `"exam"` variant has the advantage that `nsamp` can be fully used now and that questions that build on each other can be used in the exam.
- New argument `shufflesections = FALSE` can be set to `TRUE` in order to randomly shuffle the order of sections/exercises for each participant. For `selection = "pool"` this corresponds to shuffling the sections that contain the pools of exercises. For `selection = "exam"` it corresponds to shuffling the exercises within each exam section.
- New argument `cloze_schoice_display = "auto"` that controls the display of `schoice` elements in `cloze` exercises. By default, radio `"buttons"` are used if the answer list appears in its own paragraph and a `"dropdown"` menu is used if the answer list appears inline (and has no mathematical markup). Both options can also be enforced explicitly, independently from the answer list appearing in a separate paragraph or inline.
- The default `stitle` (section title) and `ititle` (item title) are now `NULL` so that items are simply numbered consecutively (1, ..., n) and section titles are omitted. Similarly, the default `sdescription` is now empty omitting the section description as it is typically not necessary.

The are some additional new arguments that allow further fine control of a test's configuration. The most important and flexible is the argument `config = TRUE`. The logical specification `config = TRUE`/`FALSE` uses the default configuration or switches off the extra configuration entirely, respectively. Moreover, a list of options like `config = list(cancel = TRUE, scoreprogress = TRUE)` can be provided for customizing how OpenOlat renders the QTI 2.1 content, see `?openolat_config` for more details.

Finally. a new argument `envir` has been added that is passed on to `xweave()`. By setting this to a common environment, e.g., `envir = .GlobalEnv` (or some new dedicated environment), it is possible to re-use variables generated in one exercise in previous exercises, e.g., for creating a sequence of variables based on the same data set. Note that this needs to be combined with `selection = "exam"` (see above).


## Enhancements for Moodle

The popular `exams2moodle()` interface has been improved, in particular for more flexible `cloze` exercises:

- `mchoice` elements in `cloze` questions are now properly supported. By default they are shown as `MULTIRESPONSE` checkboxes and employ Moodle's default evaluation strategy where each incorrect box eliminates one correct box. A different evaluation strategy can, in principle, be chosen but Moodle might not process all negative points correctly.
- `schoice` elements in `cloze` questions are still rendered as `MULTICHOICE` drop-down menus by default unless they contain math markup. As this is not rendered by Moodle in drop-down menus, a `MULTICHOICE_V` column of radio buttons is used in this case.
- To allow for customization of both `mchoice` and `schoice` elements in `cloze` questions, the are now both `cloze_mchoice_display` and `cloze_schoice_display` arguments. This is not fully backward compatible because in previous versions `cloze_mchoice_display` was also used to customize `schoice` elements. Now a warning is issued in this case.
- To fix the maximum width of fill-in-the-blank cells in `num` and/or `string` sub-items (e.g., when presented in a table), arguments `numwidth` and `stringwidth` have been added to `make_question_moodle()`. Alternatively, they can also be specified through `exextra` tags in each exercise. See the [fourfold2]({{ site.url }}/templates/fourfold2/) exercise for an example and `?make_question_moodle` for more details.

Moreover, there is a new experimental function `moodle2exams()` that can take a Moodle XML quiz file with numeric, multichoice, shortanswer, and essay exercises and convert them to R/exams exercise files, either in Rmd or Rnw format. If the text formatting is more advanced (e.g., containing mathematical notation or tables etc.) the function might not lead to fully satisfactory results but still provide a useful starting point for subsequent manual editing.


## New exams2xyz interfaces

Various new learning management systems or quiz engines can now be interfaced using R/exams. The work on `exams2testvision()` and `exams2grasple()` was financially supported by the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (Project code OL20-06), and the University of Amsterdam.

- `exams2ilias()` for the open-source [ILIAS learning management system](https://www.ilias.de/). This is essentially a convenience wrapper to `exams2qti12()`, tweaking a few defaults and employing a somewhat modified XML template. Not all question types are supported, though, mostly string questions with open-ended answers and multiple-choice and single-choice questions. Numeric and cloze questions are not supported, yet.
- `exams2testvision()` for the Dutch testing platform [TestVision](https://www.testvision.nl/en/). It is essentially a fork of `exams2qti21()` that incorporates TestVision's own strict implementation of QTI 2.1. See the [online tutorial]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/exams2testvision/) on how to upload the zip output from `exams2testvision()` into the system by selecting it in the import menu and then moving the imported material to the appropriate directories.  
  Additionally, there is a new function `testvision2exams()` to convert TestVision's QTI 2.1 questions to R/exams exercise files, either in Rmd or Rnw format. The supported TestVision question types are 'invul (numeriek)', 'een-uit-meer', 'meer-uit-meer', and 'open' which are converted to `num`, `schoice`, `mchoice`, and `string`, respectively.
- `exams2grasple()` for [Grasple](https://www.grasple.com/), a Dutch practice platform for mathematics and statistics education. It supports `num` and `schoice` questions which are exported to a zip file containing [Grasple's JSON format](https://github.com/grasple/open-format/blob/main/exercise.schema.json). Note that currently importing cannot be done by users themselves; it requires a request for manual import by a Grasple team member.
- `exams2particify()` that can export exercises to a comma-separated values (CSV) format for import in the [audience response system Particify](https://particify.de/), the successor to ARSnova. In particular, single-choice and multiple-choice exercises are fully supported while num and string question are converted to open-ended text questions.
- `exams2kahoot()` that can export sufficiently simple single-choice and multiple-choice exercises to an Excel sheet via `openxlsx::write.xlsx()` that can be imported by the [game-based learning platform Kahoot!](https://kahoot.com/) (suggested by Rushad Faridi). Exercises are converted to plain text and questions must not exceed 120 characters, answers must not exceed 75 characters.


## Enhancements for written exams (NOPS format)

The [exams2nops()]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/exams2nops/) function is the R/exams interface for generating exams of single-choice and multiple-choice questions, that can be scanned and evaluated automatically.

Various improvemens have been made in `nops_scan()`, especially for scanning the boxes pertaining to the student registration ID. Rather than reading a very small area around each box and just shaving off its borders, a larger area is read now and then shaved iteratively. Hence, it is also easily possible to further increase the `size` of the area which may sometimes lead to improved scanning results.

In the `exams2nops()` function itself, the handling of `reglength < 7` has been improved. Internally, `reglength = 7` is still enforced (and thus necessary in the registration CSV file) but the initial IDs are fixed to "0" in the exam sheet and corresponding boxes ticked already.

Finally, [language support]({{ site.url }}/tutorials/nops_language/) has been extended by two new languages: Czech (`cz`, by Jindřich Marek) and Galician (`gl`, by Marta Sestelo & Nora M. Villanueva).


## Enhancements for Blackboard

In the `exams2blackboard()` interface the new argument `mathjax = NULL` has been added that optionally embeds the MathJax `<script>` in each of the exercises. This allows to render mathematical content by the MathJax plugin for all modern browsers. Without MathJax, the browser itself has to do the rendering directly (which is supported by Firefox and Safari but not by Chrome for example). The default is `FALSE` unless `converter = "pandoc-mathjax"` is used. But also for the default converters (producing MathML output) `mathjax = TRUE` can be used. (Suggested and tested by Sean Quallen and Gabriele Cantaluppi.)

Moreover, the following improvements may be useful for Blackboard users: Rendering verbatim code chunks can be fixed from `<pre>` to `<code>` tags if `fix_pre = TRUE` (default) which is necessary in classical Blackboard systems. Points can be specified through `expoints`.


## Further improvements

* When running exercises via `knitr::knit()` errors in the R code will stop the evaluation now by default. This was always the default behavior for Rnw exercises (i.e., when processed with `engine = "sweave"`) but now is also the default for Rmd exercises and for Rnw exercises via `engine = "knitr"`. In exercises processed via `knitr::knit()` it is possible to carry on with code evaluation after errors (the default in `knitr`) by setting the chunk option `error = TRUE`. Similarly, the default handling of warnings has been set to `warning = FALSE` so that warnings are reported on the console rather than in the weaved/knitted exercises.
* Added new argument `texengine = "pdflatex"` to `exams2pdf()` which is passed on to `tinytex::latexmk(..., engine = texengine)`. Provided that `tinytex` support is installed, this option can also be set to `texengine = "xelatex"` or `"lualatex"` for example.
* Interfaces `exams2html()`, `exams2pdf()`, and `exams2pandoc()` gained an argument `exshuffle = NULL` which can be modified to overrule the `exshuffle` setting within an exercise (if any). For example, setting `exams2xyz(..., exshuffle = FALSE)` retains the full answerlist without any permutation.
* In `xexams()` a new argument `rds = FALSE` was added that indicates whether the list returned by the function should also be saved as an RDS data file. If `rds = TRUE` the file name `metainfo.rds` is used but alternatively `rds` can also be specified as a character file name to be used. The new `rds` argument is leveraged in `exams2blackboard()`, `exams2moodle()`, `exams2pdf()`, `exams2html()`, `exams2qti12()`, and `exams2qti21()`, as well as other interfaces built on top of these.
