
The manuscript is very well written and solves an interesting and real
problem. I enjoyed reading it.

My questions/comments:

1) The convention of using exams2xyz is interesting. Why was there not a
straight-forward application of object oriented programming where there is
one common class (say 'exams') and methods to generate the appropriate
format (much in the same way that 'print' displays an object)?

2) Not much is said about assigning points to questions, especially
multiple choice problems. I know that this is possible in Moodle. Wouldn't
this require manual tinkering with the resulting XML files? If not, it
would be helpful to show some details in the manuscript.

3) While I don't have any issue with using LaTeX as the base markup
language, it may leave some unwilling to use this framework. I have seen
more willingness to accept markdown as a base format from the LaTeX
uninitiated. Do the authors have any insight into this from a sociology
perspective and a technical perspective (i.e. translation of markdown to
other formats)?

4) Can the system accommodate multi-part questions? For example, if the
same data set is used over a series of questions, should the data be
created repeatedly for each questions? Suppose I have a simple 2-way
factorial design. I may want to ask a series of questions based on the
same data regarding: the full main effects and interaction model, the main
effects only model, model diagnostics, post-hoc comparisons, etc. How
would one structure such a problem in this system.

5) I would recommend rewriting the sentence "Here, we focus on an
illustration how to generate different output formats form such
exercises." Perhaps to much alliteration for me, but it took me a minute
to parse that text.

